Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s part
two of our three-part mini-series on
Gli Anni Di Piombo, The Years of Lead.
In case you missed part one, we set
the scene, reminded ourselves of some
modern Italian history, talked about
the various political groups involved,
and the tragic bombing at Milan’s
Piazza Fontana in December 1969.
Today, we are going to move into the
next, bloody stage: the Red Brigades
and the kidnapping of Aldo Moro.
And next up, we’ll talk about how
it all came to a close, with the
bombing of the train station at
Bologna, and the shadow this period
still casts over the Italy of today.
This mini-series is the sort of one
that will be much easier to follow if
you listen to it all in order, so just
in case you haven’t listened to part
one yet, now is probably the time to
press pause and catch up on that one.
Ok, let’s not waste a minute, and learn
about Le Brigate Rosse, the Red Brigades.
There is a quote that’s often attributed
to Abraham Lincoln that goes “You can
please some of the people all of the
time, you can please all of the people
some of the time, but you can't please
all of the people all of the time”.
As a politician, and indeed,
pretty much anyone in any position
of power, clearly it’s true.
People have different opinions and
beliefs, they want different things.
Sometimes these interests overlap;
some people may always approve
of what you do, but not everyone
will always agree with you.
And in the deeply fragmented
environment of post-war Italy,
this was especially true.
Communists, fascists, nationalists,
the Vatican, Americans,
rich, poor, north and south.
Finding common ground between all of these
often competing interest groups was, well,
not impossible, according to one man.
Aldo Moro had been Prime Minister of
Italy five times: three times during
the 1960s, and twice during the 1970s.
He was a senior figure within the
Christian Democrat party, the centrist
political party that dominated
Italian politics for most of the
second half of the 20th century.
The second most powerful party at
the time was the communist party.
It had been gaining strength and
popularity throughout the 1970s,
and in the 1976 election — the first
election after the voting age was
reduced from 21 to 18 — it won 34%
of the vote, only narrowly trailing
the Christian Democrats’ 39%.
And the remaining 27% was split between
smaller parties, from the neo-fascist
MSI to the socialists and republicans.
Finding any viable majority
seemed completely unworkable.
For the Christian Democrats,
this would mean working with a
coalition of smaller parties with
completely opposing positions.
Or it would mean getting
into bed with the communists.
Again, completely unworkable.
The Christian Democrats, or we can
just call them DC, for short, were
the continuity party: church, family,
traditional, conservative values.
The communists, the Partito Communista
Italiano, or PCI for short, well, they
were communists supported by Moscow.
And this was the middle of the Cold War.
It was never going to work.
Or so most people thought.
There was one person who
thought it could: Aldo Moro.
He had been working with the leader of
the communist party on something called
the “historic compromise”, a way to
work with the communists, making them
a partner in the heart of government.
This had, if it’s possible, the
complete opposite effect of that
Lincoln quote we started with.
It pleased none of the
people all the time.
Moscow hated it because it brought the
Italian communists closer to the West.
The US hated it because it gave the
communists a seat at the G7 table.
Domestically, the left opposed it
because it was seen as compromising
on key positions, and the right
opposed it for the same reason.
The then US Secretary of State, Henry
Kissinger, even had a warning for
Moro, reportedly telling him, “You stop
doing this thing–this collaboration–or
you will be badly punished.”
Moro did not stop.
And he almost got there.
However, on the morning of 16th
March, 1978, as he was leaving for
a meeting, his car was ambushed.
Moro was dragged away
and held for 55 days.
The perpetrators were Le
Brigate Rosse, the Red Brigades.
Or at least, that is the official verdict.
The episode has gone down as the darkest
in the years of lead, the kidnapping
of one of the country’s longest
serving leaders in broad daylight, and
has been called Italy’s 9/11 moment.
It is also to this day the subject
of controversy and intrigue, with
many theories suggesting that the
official verdict may be omitting the
influence of everyone from the CIA, the
Stasi, the KGB, Mossad, Palestinians,
Masonic Lodges, and even the Mafia.
So, let’s return to that morning
of March 16th, 1978, the day now
remembered as the day of the strage
di via Fani — the Via Fani massacre.
Moro’s car was on its way through
a quiet Roman street when, at 9
am, a Fiat 128 blocked the convoy.
A group of armed Red Brigades
members, disguised as Alitalia
crew members, jumped out.
Within seconds, gunfire erupted.
Ninety-one shots in less than two minutes.
When it all stopped, all five
of Moro’s bodyguards were dead.
Moro himself was bundled
into a waiting car.
It was an attack carried
out with chilling precision.
The Red Brigades weren’t just street
thugs; they were a highly organised
terrorist group, with cells, weapons
training, and an ideology that saw
themselves as soldiers in a revolutionary
war against the Italian state.
A couple of days after the kidnapping,
the Red Brigades released their first
communication, claiming credit for Moro’s
kidnapping, and sending a picture proving
he was still alive, the famous image of
him in front of the Brigate Rosse sign.
In this communication, they declared
that he would be put on a “People’s
Trial”, where he would answer the charges
of his crimes against the proletariat.
For the next almost two months, 55
days in total, the Red Brigades would
release a series of communications,
including letters written by Moro:
to his political colleagues, to
his wife, and even to the pope.
In these letters, he begged for a deal
to be made, pleading for his life.
In them, he sounded like a broken
man, terrified, abandoned, convinced
that his colleagues were sacrificing
him for political principle.
These communications kept the public
up to date with the “trial” and
their demands for Moro’s release.
Initially, the kidnappers demanded
the release of 13 imprisoned
members of The Red Brigades, but
this was later reduced to one.
And this was all played out
very publicly, with the entire
country watching on tenterhooks.
And it was, of course, the subject of
great debate, from the inner circles
of government to the pensioners
playing cards in the village bar:
what could be done to get him home?
Should the state
negotiate with terrorists?
On one side was the so-called linea della
fermezza, the “hard line,” championed by
the Prime Minister, Giulio Andreotti, and
his Interior Minister, Francesco Cossiga.
Their position was clear: the
Republic must not bow to violence.
To make a deal would only encourage
more kidnappings, more bloodshed.
And there was already more than enough.
On the other side were those
who favoured the linea della
trattativa, the “soft line.”
They argued that Moro’s life was more
important than abstract principles,
that saving him was worth compromise.
Among them were several members of
his own Christian Democratic Party,
figures in the Socialist Party, and,
of course, his desperate family.
Even the Vatican tried to intervene.
Pope Paul VI, who was a personal
friend of Moro, made a heartfelt public
appeal: “I beg you on my knees,” he
said to the kidnappers, “give Aldo
Moro back to his family, unharmed.”
Yet the state’s position was clear:
we will not negotiate with terrorists.
While all of this was going on,
there was a frantic search to
find the kidnappers' whereabouts.
It was clearly a large job, with
multiple people involved in the planning
and execution of the kidnapping.
Moro had been snatched from
the streets of the capital.
This had been going on for almost
two months, and someone, somewhere,
must have heard something.
The police looked for clues in
Moro’s letters, thinking he might
have left hidden secret messages
beneath the innocent-looking words.
Whatever tip the authorities
followed, it led to nothing.
And as the days went by, the so-called
“People’s Trial” came to a close.
In their ninth and final communication,
the Red Brigades announced that
Aldo Moro had been found guilty
and would be sentenced accordingly.
In other words, he was
about to be executed.
Still, the state remained resolute.
It did nothing.
Its policy was clear: we do
not negotiate with terrorists.
And on the 9th of May 1978,
the waiting came to an end.
Moro’s trusted assistant, Francesco
Tritto, received a phone call from a man
who said he was from The Red Brigades.
Moro was dead, he told him.
Go to via Caetani in central Rome.
There’s a red Renault.
Look in the boot.
You’ll find him there.
The police rushed to the scene.
They opened the boot and found
Moro’s lifeless body, still wearing
the suit he had been kidnapped in.
The location had been chosen with
deliberate cruelty: halfway between
the headquarters of the Christian
Democrats and those of the Communist
Party, as if to symbolise the death
of Moro’s dream of compromise.
The shock was immense.
Leaders of all parties
condemned the murder.
Italians wept in the streets.
There were offers of a state funeral,
but in a very public statement against
a country they felt had abandoned
him, his family refused, instead
opting for a private funeral, to
which no politicians were invited.
And there, the grief was mixed with
fury; fury at the Red Brigades, fury
at the state’s refusal to negotiate,
fury at the sense that something
essential had died along with him.
And for the Red Brigades, even
though they might have achieved their
stated goal by putting Aldo Moro
on trial and humiliating the state,
this whole saga would be a disaster.
After killing Moro, they lost all public
sympathy, even among radical workers
and students, people who may have shared
some similar political ideologies but
who saw kidnapping and murder as entirely
beyond the pale, utterly unjustified.
The communist party denounced them
outright; the left turned its back.
The state was galvanised to crush them,
and within three years, 32 members
of the Red Brigades, including most
of its leadership, were convicted
and sentenced to life imprisonment
for their role in the Moro affair.
And Aldo Moro’s dream of the
“historic compromise”, well,
without its key architect and
proponent, it was out of the window.
But not everyone lost out from the affair.
For the Christian Democrats, especially
the right of the party, it meant
continuity, a continuation of the system
that Moro had been pushing to change,
as well as greater public support for a
crackdown against left-wing extremism.
This also played out nicely for Italy’s
Western allies, who had been fearful
of communists getting a seat at the
table, as Moro had been proposing.
And domestically, anyone who opposed
communism probably also benefited,
whether this was elements of Masonic
Lodges such as the infamous P2 [P2
in English], or even the mafia.
And, like in Piazza Fontana and the
Bologna bombing that we’ll talk about in
the next episode, this has given rise to
theories that the official explanation
might not be telling the whole story.
In the case of Aldo Moro, there
are many things that don’t add up,
and some that are just plain weird.
There was a séance, of all things, a
kind of spiritual meeting where people
try to communicate with the dead.
This was held by a group of professors
at the University of Rome, who
claimed to receive messages from
the beyond about Moro’s location.
Absurd as it sounds, their cryptic clues
were actually passed to the police,
and some of them eerily pointed to
places connected with the kidnapping.
So you either believe in the
supernatural, or you believe that
this was a way for someone to pass
information “unofficially” to the police.
And one of the people at this seance
was Romano Prodi, a name you may
remember because he has served
twice as Italian Prime Minister,
in the late 1990s and late 2000s.
What’s more, there were reports of
missed opportunities, bungled searches,
and phone calls that were ignored.
It would later turn out that Moro never
left Rome, yet somehow the Italian
police, with all their resources,
never found him, even though they
raided hundreds of apartments.
How could the kidnappers have
moved him around a city swarming
with checkpoints and surveillance?
And then there’s the international angle.
Some accounts suggest that foreign
intelligence agencies, the CIA, the
KGB, and even the Stasi, all had
their eyes on Italy at the time.
A Communist party joining the
government of a NATO country
was unthinkable to Washington.
To Moscow, the compromise
looked like betrayal.
Did these superpowers have an
interest in seeing Moro silenced?
There are no definitive answers.
And that’s exactly the point.
The kidnapping of Aldo Moro remains
an open wound in Italy because the
official story leaves too many gaps.
When the state cannot, or will not,
explain fully what happened, conspiracy
theories rush in to fill the void.
And to this day, the kidnapping and murder
of Aldo Moro remain one of the darkest
chapters in modern Italian history.
Not just because of the
violence, but because of the
questions that still linger.
Did the government really
do all it could to save him?
Did foreign powers play a hidden role?
Was the state itself complicit
in letting him die to prevent the
Communists from entering power?
In all likelihood, the full
truth will never come to light.
But what is certain is that
Moro’s death marked something of a
turning point in the Years of Lead.
And just two years later, Italy would
be shaken again by an atrocity deadlier
than anything that had come before,
the bombing of Bologna train station in
1980, an attack that remains the worst
act of terrorism in Italian history.
And that, my friends, is what
we’ll explore in the third and
final part of this mini-series.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on the kidnapping of Aldo Moro.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Italy is one of our most
popular countries, and this
was not even 50 years ago.
So, for the Italians, or indeed
anyone, who might remember this period.
What are your memories of it from the
time, and how do you remember it now,
looking back on it five decades later?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.